next up previous contents
Next: A. Changelog Up: GNU Aspell 0.50.3 Previous: 7. Adding Support For  
Contents



8. How Aspell Works

The magic behind my spell checker comes from merging Lawrence Philips
excellent metaphone algorithm and Ispell's near miss strategy which is
inserting a space or hyphen, interchanging two adjacent letters, changing
one letter, deleting a letter, or adding a letter.

The process goes something like this.

 1. Convert the misspelled word to its soundslike equivalent (its
    metaphone for English words).
 2. Find all words that have a soundslike within one or two edit distances
    from the original words soundslike. The edit distance is the total
    number of deletions, insertions, exchanges, or adjacent swaps needed
    to make one string equivalent to the other. When set to only look for
    soundslikes within one edit distance it tries all possible soundslike
    combinations and check if each one is in the dictionary. When set to
    find all soundslike within two edit distance it scans through the
    entire dictionary and quickly scores each soundslike. The scoring is
    quick because it will give up if the two soundslikes are more than two
    edit distances apart.
 3. Find misspelled words that have a correctly spelled replacement by the
    same criteria of step number 2 and 3. That is the misspelled word in
    the word pair (such as teh -> the) would appear in the suggestions
    list as if it was a correct spelling.
 4. Score the result list and return the words with the lowest score. The
    score is roughly the weighed average of the weighed edit distance of
    the word to the misspelled word and the soundslike equivalent of the
    two words. The weighted edit distance is like the edit distance except
    that the various edits have weights attached to them.
 5. Replace the misspelled words that have correctly spelled replacements
    with their replacements and remove any duplicates that might arise
    because of this.

Please note that the soundslike equivalent is a rough approximation of how
the words sounds. It is not the phoneme of the word by any means. For more
details about exactly how each step is performed please see the file 
suggest.cc. For more information on the metaphone algorithm please see the
data file english_phonet.dat.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
next up previous contents
Next: A. Changelog Up: GNU Aspell 0.50.3 Previous: 7. Adding Support For  
Contents
Thorsten Maerz 2002-12-18
